Lord, we thank You that You have blessed us with the time to worship together.
Thank You for singing and worship music.
Thank You for prayers.
Thank You for fellowship.
Thank You for laughter, for families and friends.
Thank You, God, that You have saved us and You've put us in a group of people.
Lord, You know how every week I feel woefully inadequate to take upon this responsibility of preaching Your Word.
I'm God, but we trust that you will speak to your people through these words, that you will do it not because of who I am, but because of who you are.
So God, we pray that you would prepare our hearts and our minds in our ears and our understanding that we might come to a better grasp of who you are and what you've called us to.
Lord, we pray that you would be with our students downstairs as they
learn about you in their context and in their language, bless them in their time with their peers and with the volunteers who teach them and lead them.
God, we pray for those who are in the nursery, those leaders who are loving our youngest disciples and the kids, Lord, we pray that they would come to know your love through this body of Christ, that they would be introduced to your word and that they would be introduced to this God who has created them and who continues to stand by them every second of every day.
Lord, be with us now as we turn to your word, in Jesus' name we pray, amen.
All right, so we're gonna be looking at part of Exodus chapter 19, so verses one through eight, and then we'll just barely touch on the 10 commandments that start in Exodus chapter 20.
So I'm starting in Exodus chapter 19, verses one through eight.
On the first day of the third month after the Israelites left Egypt, on that very day,
they came to the desert of Sinai.
After they set out from refedim, they entered the desert of Sinai in Israel camp there in the desert in front of the mountain.
Then Moses went up to God and the Lord called to him from the mountain and said, this is what you are to say to the descendants of Jacob and what you are to tell the people of Israel.
You yourselves have seen what I did to Egypt and how I carried you on eagle's wings and brought you to myself.
Now if you obey me fully,
keep my covenant.
Then out of all nations, you will be my treasured possession.
Although the whole earth is mine, you will be, for me, a kingdom of priests in the holy nation.
These are the words you are to speak to the Israelites."
So Moses went back and summoned the elders of the people.
Except before them, all the words the Lord had commanded him to speak.
The people all responded together, we will do everything the Lord has said.
So Moses brought their answer back to the Lord.
And then we skip ahead a little bit to the giving of the 10 words, the decalogue of the 10 commandments.
And God spoke all these words, I am the Lord your God who brought you out of Egypt, out of the land of slavery.
You shall have no other gods before me.
Well, this is the word of the Lord, do we say thanks be to God.
Yes, indeed, thanks be to God.
My voice, it sounds like I'm losing my voice.
I probably feel better than I sound right now, but please excuse me if my voice changes or cracks or does something weird that I'm not anticipating.
All right, if I say to you that we need to have a DTR talk, do you know what this means?
We need to have a DTR conversation.
Oh, to find the relationship, yes.
So if you have been, say you've been in a relationship, you've been dating somebody for a couple months, and you want some clarity about where you stand.
You're gonna have a relationship talk, you're gonna have a DTR conversation, you're gonna define the relationship.
You may come up to this person, your significant other, you say, hey, I need to know.
Are you in this?
Are you for me?
Are you just for me?
Are you going to commit yourself to me and only me?
Are we doing this more than just to have fun?
Is there a purpose here?
Is there an end goal in mind?
Do we share that same end purpose and end goal that we're committing to something?
This is a DTR talk, define the relationship.
Well, Israel is at this point in their history when God initiates this kind of conversation, this define the relationship conversation.
And he does this with the people as they gather at the mountain.
But this is not a new relationship that's being established.
This is something that has already been in existence.
Well, God, back in Genesis, came to a specific person named Abraham.
And he came to Abraham and he said, I'm going to be your God and I'm going to be the God of your descendants too.
So Abraham, from him, comes a multitude of people, comes this big, numerous nation, and they are captured or they are enslaved by the Egyptians.
And then God does the work of deliverance.
He frees them from slavery in Egypt.
He's with them at the outset of their journey as they come out of Egypt and start making their way to the Promised Land.
And now God brings them to this place where he has this conversation
where he says, you know what, we need to define this relationship.
I need to know, are you in?
Are you fully committed?
This relationship is for you, but I just need to know, are you in it?
So what is it that Israel is agreeing to here?
Well, in that the ancient Near East world in this context, formal relationships were established called covenants.
covenants and one type of covenant that existed was called a suzerine vassal covenant or a relationship.
It was a forming of a formal relationship.
And in this specific relationship, the suzerine was the more powerful of the two parties.
This was either the king or the stronger nation.
And they would enter into a relationship
They would initiate relationship with the vassal, the weaker of the two nations or the weaker of the two parties, usually somebody that was subject to the king or subject to this nation.
And they would formalize this relationship.
And like any relationship, there are some pieces to a relationship.
There is commitment and there is purpose.
Now this mosaic covenant that is established, that started off with Abraham and his relationship with God, and now it's continued and it's advanced through the Israelites.
Well, this is a suzerine vassal covenant.
And God, as the stronger part, he has the suzerine, he initiates this conversation, he initiates this defining of the relationship with Israel.
And the first thing that he's impressing upon them as we look at this covenant relationship is commitment.
God says, I want you to obey my voice.
I want you to keep my covenant fully.
The first commandment that God gives to them out of the Ten Commandments or the Ten Words, the Decalogue is, what is it?
You shall have no other gods before me.
Well, God is saying that you are to be exclusively for me.
I don't want you to have eyes for anybody else.
No longing looks.
No stealing quick glances from other people.
And definitely, no relations outside of this.
The people are to look to the Lord, look to their king for everything they need.
It's that big scary word when we're in a relationship, exclusive.
there to be exclusively committed to the Lord.
This is what the Lord is asking of them.
But there's also an intention piece, a purpose piece.
What is the reason behind this relationship?
What is it for?
Now for Abraham, now continued through to Israel, the relationship
the reasoning for it has always been outward facing.
God comes to Abraham in Genesis chapter 12 and he says, Abraham, I am going to make you into a great nation.
I am going to bless you and all peoples on earth will be blessed through you.
So yes, Israel is entering into this relationship or continuing this relationship with the Lord.
And it is for their benefit and it is for their well-being, but ultimately it is for the people around them.
It is for the nations to see and to know who this God is.
And so the Lord in this intention or in this purpose, he says these words, you are to be, for me, a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.
a kingdom of priests and a holy nation you are to be.
And so just as priests, they represent God to the people.
Well, so now Israel is to represent God to the surrounding nations.
And if you think about the life of a priest, they live a life that is fully committed and it is fully devoted to the Lord.
They live not for themselves, they live for the Lord.
And everything they are to do is to be set apart.
This is the meaning of holiness.
We talk about a holy nation.
Holiness is that quality of being set apart.
You take something away from its normal use and you consecrate it for a special use.
And in this case, it is special use to be used in service to God and by God.
And so Israel as a priestly kingdom, Israel as a holy nation, they are to live in ways that are markedly different from the nations around them.
They are to represent God to the nations showing God's character through the way that they live.
They are to be God's people, showing that yes, we have honor and respect in family relationships and all other relationships that we are loving to our neighbors.
that we have concerned for the poor, for the immigrant, for the vulnerable, for the elderly.
We are people who are fair in our business dealings.
We are people who are concerned with the non-human aspect of creation.
We are people who live in different ways.
This is what God is asking for.
that from these people, he's asking for their exclusive commitment, and he's asking that they not be about themselves, that they live in certain ways before other nations so that the other nations might know who God is.
So they might see his character reflected through the way that they live their lives amongst these nations, a showcase, a display case, if you will.
And the same is true for our relationship with God.
We are to be fully and exclusively committed to the Lord.
And this is not for us.
This is not unto ourselves.
This is for the sake of the people around us so that they might know the Lord, so that they might know his character, his goodness, his holiness, his righteousness, his care, and his compassion for them.
Here at Miller from Church, one of our values is integrity.
reflecting Christ in our character, our choices, and our commitments.
Now, integrity, it means its wholeness.
Having a life of integrity means you're undivided.
It means that you are the same person.
You show up the same way, not just on Sundays, but you show up the same way throughout the week, through your workplaces, to your schools.
When you go out to eat at restaurants, when you're traveling abroad,
when you're living in your house, so nobody sees what you're doing, you are the same person.
We are to live this way of fully committed to the Lord.
Live this way outside for the benefit of those around us.
Now, as we look at this and say, okay, what might this look like?
Let's look at it through the lens.
of these key local causes that we're looking to address.
As a congregation we've said, we are going to address food insecurity, we are going to address loneliness.
These are the ways that we are going to kind of live out this mission outward facing.
So let's say, what does it look like to live as God's people, to display God's character when we interact with people at school?
We say, well, maybe it's standing up for people who are being made fun of.
I mean, that's one way.
When we have the January's here, if you were able to catch any of it, one of the speakers was Vivek Murthy.
And he was talking about loneliness in particular, especially in the schools and the impact that it's causing.
But he was saying, I think this is out in California, there was a group of middle schoolers that formed
that form really this group around a cause to identify people, identify peers who were lonely.
So they would be eating in the cafeteria or the lunchroom and they would identify somebody who was eating by themselves or seemed to be lonely and they'd go up to them and they would say, hey bro, you look lonely.
They would say, hey, would you like to come and join us in serving in this way or participating in this group?
So this might be another way of engaging with people, recognizing that they're lonely.
I know you can think of people in your workplace that are lonely, people that are in your schools that are lonely.
This might be one way.
We think about it in our neighborhoods.
It's going out to the people that live by us, those people that we don't know, especially those people that we don't like.
We go to them with a compassion, with the care of Christ, inviting them maybe to be connected, to some way reach out to them.
This coming Sunday, next week after the worship service, as was announced, we're going to be pre-packaging meals.
Pre-packaging meals that are to be sent out to those people who have need, those people who struggle
with food either obtaining it or making it, and those that are lonely.
So one of these ways is to be thinking about, hey, who around me, who in my life could I take this prepackaged meal to?
Who can I be a blessing to?
Maybe it's a regular acquaintance, somebody that I don't know, somebody that I do know that's going through a hard time and they could be blessed by a meal.
So I want you to be thinking of this, to be considering this.
And what does it look like to live Christ character out in our relationships?
It's putting the other person first.
It is listening, seeking to understand.
It is honoring and respecting the opinion of the other person.
It is having hard conversations with truth and respect.
Well, it has God's people.
We are to live these lives that are fully committed to Him in everything that we do.
We are to live these lives that are always looking out, not for ourselves.
Our relationship with Christ, it is not ultimately about us.
It is about what God wants to do through us to reach the nations, to reach the people who don't yet know Him.
So does this feel hard?
Does this feel heavy?
Does this seem like it kind of pushes against our natural inclination to be concerned about ourselves and to live in those ways that where we are divided and we live for those things that benefit us just depending on the situation or circumstance?
Well, yeah, yeah, definitely.
And if we try to live out to this aspect of our relationship with Christ from our own strength,
We are going to fail.
We are going to become tired.
We are going to become weary.
We are going to become discouraged.
It will not be sustainable.
It will not be faithful work.
And for this purpose, for this reason, identity has to come first.
We have to know who we are.
We have to know who's we are before what we do.
And this is what God does for Israel.
God gives them a profound sense of who they are to him before he says these words of exclusive commitment, before he says you're gonna be, to me, a kingdom of priests and the holy nation.
And he does it in different ways, though we're gonna focus on this phrasing when he calls them the descendants of Jacob and the people of Israel.
So first we get the sense from this phrase, and we know that they are his people.
Their identity is his people.
14 times up to this point in the story, God has called them my people.
He says, let my people go.
I have seen the misery and heard the cries of my people.
I will make a distinction between my people and your people, my people, the Israelites.
Now how is
How is God able to say this?
My people?
He's able to say this because he's already committed himself to these people.
He's committed himself to these people through the covenant.
The covenant made to Abraham that I will be your God and you will be my people.
The descendants after you, I will be their God and they will be my people.
Abraham gives birth to Isaac.
Isaac gives birth to Jacob and from Jacob comes this nation.
These people already belong to God, and this is a significant thing in the Exodus story.
Because from the outside, no, the Israelites do not belong to God.
From the outside, they belong to Pharaoh.
They are slaves to Pharaoh.
They are Pharaoh's property.
But God is exerting his claim over them.
He's saying, no, no, no, no, no.
These are my people.
I have claimed them for myself.
This is your identity.
You belong not to Pharaoh.
You belong to me.
And God does the same thing for us, for our identity.
He says, you don't belong.
You don't belong to those masters of the world.
You don't belong to yourself.
Nobody else, no other thing can lay claim to you.
Not money, not sex, not power, not prestige, because you belong to me.
Through the life, through the death, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, He has defeated those powers.
He has brought us to himself, as the book of Titus says, that Jesus Christ has given himself to redeem for him a people of his very own.
He has claimed us as his own.
So first, this phrasing, the descendant of Jacob, descendants of Jacob, the people of Israel, it gives him a sense that they are God's people, first and foremost, they belong to God.
But it also helps him to know,
Wow, how they lay claim to this.
That how they can say this.
They know that is not through anything that they have done.
It comes only because they are a part of this bigger promise.
They are a part of this bigger covenant that was made in grace to Abraham.
That was continued through Isaac, now continued through Jacob.
In Deuteronomy, when the second giving of the law, God says to through Moses that, I chose you to be my people.
Not because you were more numerous.
Not because you were greater than the other nations.
No, in fact, you were the weakest.
You were the smallest.
The reason that I chose you is because I chose you.
And I chose you because I love you.
Nothing can take that away.
These people are God's people.
They have done nothing to earn it.
This is before they've been given the laws and the commands.
Remember that first very, very first opening part, I am the God who freed you from slavery in Egypt.
And now here are my 10 commandments.
Now here's the book of the covenant.
No, they belong to God.
They are his people, not because of what they do or don't do, but because God has laid claim to them.
And this is the same thing for us.
God is our God.
We are his people, not because we have earned it.
not because we have done anything to make God favor us above anybody else, but because God in His grace has chosen us to be a part of this covenant of grace, that it extends to us through Jesus Christ and what He has done.
Then we have been welcomed into God's family, adopted as His sons and daughters, because of what Jesus has done.
We lay no claim to it.
Arthur is saying, God, you love me because you tell me you love me and nothing I do.
Nothing anyone else does can take that away.
The third piece of Israel's identity that we're talking about here when he says the descendants of Jacob, the people of Israel, it's hinting at a future intention.
There's a hint of future intention here.
Now, when you talk about Jacob, when you talk about Israel, these names, it really says the house of Jacob, the house of Jacob, the people of Israel.
Now, this takes us back to earlier on in Genesis, Genesis chapter 32, when Jacob, he meets with the Lord face to face.
If you remember this story, Jacob, he wrestles with God.
And as at this place, he names it Penil, which means the face of God.
He encounters God.
He comes before God.
And God, what does he do?
He changes him.
God transforms him.
And God gives him a new name.
He says, Jacob, you're not going to be Jacob anymore.
You're going to be Israel.
Your name is going to be Israel.
So now these slaves, these slaves are brought out of, out of Egypt.
And they come before God's mountain.
They come before to meet with God.
And God's intention is to change them.
God wants to make these people into His holy people.
Again, so that they can go out and so that they can display to the nations who He is.
So they come to Him and God's intention is to transform their lives.
And they'll do this by the living out of the law.
They'll love the Lord, their God with all their hearts, soul, mind, and strength.
They'll love their neighbors as themselves.
They'll build the tabernacle with all of its furnishings so that the people might know that this is a God who dwells in our midst.
These are, this is the identity of Israel.
They are the people of the king.
They belong to him.
They've done nothing to earn it.
Nobody can take it away.
And God's intention is to not leave them where they're at, but to change them into his holy people.
So when God comes to them and has this defining conversation, Israel, are you going to obey me?
Are you going to follow me?
Well, of course, they have no, they think nothing else in the say, yes, Lord.
Yes, Lord, of course we're gonna follow you.
You, who else loves us as much as you do?
Who else is able to set us free from the powers of sin and darkness and Pharaoh?
Who else exercises creation to stand up for us in our behalf?
Who else has claimed us as their own, as his own against all the powers of the world?
Yes, Lord, we will do what you say.
We will live as your people.
We will follow your covenant.
We will be in this committed relationship with you and only you as your people so that the nations may see.
Identity comes before mission.
Who we are.
We are people of the king.
We are God's people.
He has claimed us as his own.
We are people who have not earned it.
We have done nothing to deserve it.
He welcomes us into this covenant of grace.
And we are people who have been brought before the face of God.
Oh, God Himself has come to us in the person of Jesus Christ.
In a sense, we have seen Him face to face.
He has revealed Himself to us.
And not only does He live among us,
No, He lives inside of us.
We don't get holy by following the law and its regulations.
No, we get holy by the regeneration of the Holy Spirit.
Because of what Jesus Christ has done in dying and rising and ascending to the Father and sending the Holy Spirit to us, we are made holy.
We are transformed from sinners into saints.
Our mission statement, learning to live and love like Jesus as broken people saved by grace.
We go out into the world, conformed into the image of Christ, but deeply knowing that this is who we are.
We have been claimed by the king, we have been claimed by the master of the universe as his very own, as his treasured possession, as his special possession.
So yes, the call is to be fully committed.
The call is to go out into the nations, to go out into the community, shining the love and light of Christ, revealing the character of our holy God, but this is God's mission.
This is God's mission.
We do this through His strength.
We do this through His power, and we do this for His glory.
All of God's people said, amen.
All right, just a couple of areas where you might feel a sense of responsiveness.
Again, our offering, what shall I return to the Lord for His goodness to me?
We always want to be people, not just who hear the word and receive it, but who go out and put it into practice.
So I want you to think about, think about a neighbor in acquaintance that you might be able to bless with one of these prepackaged meals.
Get them in your mind this week and be praying about it.
And then come next week or have it pre-arranged where you can pick up one of these pre-arranged meals that you can go to this person to help with food insecurity or help with loneliness to start building relationships.
So have that in your mind.
Who is that neighbor?
Identify that person or pray that the Lord would lay somebody on your heart.
Maybe it's responding to this question, have I been operating out of my own strength?
Have I been trying to earn God's favor through, earn God's holiness through what I do rather than who he's made me to be as his son or daughter?
Have I been trying to find my identity outside of the Lord?
Do I need to offer the prayer, Lord, help me to know myself as your child?
How is God calling you to respond?
Take a minute or two and allow the spirit of the Lord to speak to you.